+++
title = "Learn Vim Fast"
date = "2016-10-12"
Categories = ["technical skills","vim"]
draft=true
banner="/images/pattern.jpeg"
+++

(Want to become a Vim expert? Check out my new book! [10 Minute Vim](https://leanpub.com/deliberatevim))

Vim is a complex and powerful tool for serious professionals. Most professional
tools have a steep learning curve.

If you've ever talked to a professional cyclist about bikes, you've probably
quickly realized that their equipment is totally different from the basic $100
Walmart bike and $10 pump. While similar in form and function, the professional
cyclist has much more complex equipment.

Vim is no different! Vim is complex, powerful, professional-grade equipment.
Most basic text editors come equipped with Cut, Copy, Paste, arrow keys, and
find/replace. Vim also comes with dozens of extra commands. If you are serious
about speed and efficiency, Vim and Vim plugins offer some of the most
composable commands with the least keystrokes. Powerful commands easily compose
into larger edits, and larger edits compose into persistent and repeatable
macros.

All this power comes with a price: steep learning curve. To fully master Vim,
you must put in the time. You must build up muscle memory, and muscle memory
requires repeated practice. 

To help with this, I am writing a set of practice material for building up
muscle memory in Vim. It contains a bunch of files that can be used to practice
each command. I'll start to post up different sections here for free.

(Want to become a Vim expert? Check out my new book: [10 Minute Vim](https://leanpub.com/deliberatevim))



Consider changing a car tire. Most cars come equipped with the standard crank
jack, small tire, and a basic wrench. Most of us could change a car tire in with
an hour. Contrast that hour to the seconds needed to perform a tire change on a
race car. The tools are similar in form and function, but the professional tools
are much more powerful, specialized, and complex.
